Technical Plan: Designing the Generative System
Logic (4-Bit Grayscale)
Simulating Inputs vs. Using Real Data
Before integrating actual Home Assistant (HA) or sensor data, start by simulating input data. This means
feeding your generative system with dummy values (random numbers, oscillating signals, or recorded
samples) instead of live sensor readings. Simulated inputs let you test and refine the system’s behavior
without waiting for real-world events. It also ensures you’re not locked into specific data patterns too early –
you can explore a wide range of conditions (from extreme highs to lows) to see how the visuals respond.
Crucially, the system will be  one-way (data influences visuals only). Think of it as an  ambient mirror: it
reflects external state but never alters it, which keeps the design conceptually simple and avoids accidental
feedback loops.
Why simulate first?
Rapid Iteration: You can quickly change input values or patterns (even randomly) to observe how
your visuals react in real-time. This speeds up understanding the logic and finding pleasing
behaviors.
Safety and Decoupling: By not relying on live HA data initially, you avoid any risk of the visuals
hanging or misbehaving due to missing data or connectivity issues. The generative logic becomes 
decoupled from the data source, making it easier to debug each part separately.
Exploring Extremes: You can push inputs beyond normal ranges to ensure your mapping functions
handle edge cases gracefully (e.g., what happens if a temperature value is at its maximum or zero?).
At this stage, treat the external data source as purely conceptual. Your focus is on designing how the system
would respond to inputs, without yet worrying about the actual sensor hookups or HA APIs. In practice, you
might hard-code a few test scenarios or have a simple loop that generates changing values (sine waves for
slowly varying data, random spikes for unpredictable events, etc.). This gives you a feel for the dynamic
range of your visuals.
Input Layer: Data Ingestion and Normalization
Whether using simulated data now or real sensor data later , you need an Input Layer that collects and pre-
processes these values. Start by defining what inputs (data streams) you want to use. For example, from
your Home Assistant dataset, you might consider: 
Temperature (perhaps indoor vs. outdoor),
Humidity,
Energy usage (power consumption),
Occupancy or motion sensor counts,
Time of day or light level,
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
1

Any other sensor that seems interesting (noise levels, air quality, etc.).
For now, you can create  variables for each data type and assign them synthetic values. For instance,
temp = 22.5°C,  humidity = 40%,  energy_use = 500W,  occupancy_count = 2 as a starting
state, then update these values over time in your simulation.
Normalization: It’s important to normalize the raw data into a standard scale before feeding it forward.
Generative algorithms often work best with inputs in a 0.0–1.0 range (or sometimes -1.0–1.0 if values can
swing  positive/negative  around  a  center).  Decide  on  realistic  min–max  ranges  for  each  sensor:  -  e.g.
Temperature might map 0°C to 1.0 (if 0 is an interesting extreme to visualize) and 40°C to 1.0, or whatever
bounds make sense for your environment. - Humidity 0% → 0.0, 100% → 1.0. - Energy use could be trickier
(depends on your home’s typical usage); you might say 0 kW = 0.0 and, say, 5 kW = 1.0 (if 5 kW is near max
usage in your data).
Use linear mapping initially for simplicity: normalized_value = (raw - min) / (max - min) (clamped between
0 and 1). Later you can explore non-linear scaling (logarithmic for very skewed distributions, or thresholds
for categorical effects), but linear is a good start until you see a need for more complex mapping.
Example: If temperature today ranges from 18 to 30°C typically, you could set 18→0.0 and 30→1.0. A live
reading of 24°C would then normalize to about 0.5 (mid-range). If the value goes above 30 or below 18, you
could clamp it or allow slight overshoot beyond 0–1 (though generally clamping is fine).
By centralizing this normalization logic, you make it easy to adjust later . Perhaps create a small function
or class, e.g. normalize(value, min, max), or even better , keep a dictionary of {sensor_name: (min,
max)} so you can adjust ranges in one place. This Input Layer can also handle smoothing if needed. Real
sensor data might be noisy or jumpy (e.g., power usage could spike suddenly). A simple moving average or
low-pass filter on the input values can prevent jarring visual flicker . For now, your simulated data might
already be smooth, but be prepared to implement smoothing once you connect real streams.
Lastly, design the Input Layer to be generic. If later you switch from simulated data to actual HA feeds, the
rest of your system shouldn’t care. For example, you could have an interface where the Input Layer provides
a  dictionary  of  current  normalized  values  (e.g.,  {"temp": 0.5, "humidity": 0.8, "energy":  
0.2, ...}) each frame or on each update cycle. During simulation, that dictionary is filled by your test
code; in deployment, it’s filled by sensor readings. Keeping this consistent interface will make the transition
to real data just a swap of data source, with minimal code changes to your core system.
Mapping Layer: Translating Data into Visual Parameters
This is the heart of your system’s logic: how do we map the incoming data to the visuals? The goal is to
create a mapping that is meaningful and tunable – each data input should influence the graphics in a way
that makes conceptual sense and can be adjusted easily.
Start by deciding on a set of visual parameters that your generative graphics will use. These could include: 
Brightness / Contrast: Overall image brightness or the range between light and dark elements.
Density of elements: e.g. number of particles, frequency of shapes, or amount of fill in a pattern.
• 
• 
• 
2

Movement speed: How fast things move or change in the visual (could apply to particles, waves,
etc.).
Structural complexity: This could mean how detailed the pattern is (like number of subdivisions in a
grid, or recursion depth in a fractal, etc.).
Order vs. chaos: A parameter that introduces randomness – 0 might be a very regular , orderly
pattern; 1 introduces maximum noise or disorder in positions, sizes, or other attributes (this is akin
to Molnár’s idea of injecting a bit of disorder into an otherwise orderly system).
Scale or Size: If your visuals involve shapes, this could control their size, or the scale of features in a
noise texture.
Texture or dithering threshold: Since you’re in grayscale, you might have a parameter to adjust
how you dither or what threshold you use to turn a continuous image into 4-bit steps, if applicable.
Not every visual module will use all these parameters, but defining a common set of parameters is useful.
It’s similar to how synthesizers have common controls (attack, decay, filter cutoff) even if each synth’s sound
is generated differently. For example, a particle-system visualization might use “density” to decide how
many particles to emit, while a grid-based visualization might use the same “density” parameter to decide
how many grid lines or dots to draw. By keeping the parameter names consistent, you can reuse the
mapping logic across different visuals.
Now, for each of those visual parameters, decide which input data influences it, and in what proportion.
This is where weights and mapping functions come in. You can imagine a table (or matrix) where columns
are visual parameters and rows are input data sources:
               Brightness    Density    Speed    Chaos
Temperature       0.7          0.3       0.0      0.0
Humidity          0.2          0.5       0.0      0.0
Energy use        0.1          0.2       0.6      0.0
Occupancy         0.0          0.0       0.4      0.5
...
(This table is just an illustrative example, not a final design.)
In this example, Temperature has a 0.7 weight on Brightness and 0.3 on Density – meaning temperature
changes mostly affect how bright the image is, and somewhat how dense the elements are.  Energy use
strongly  affects  Speed  (0.6  weight),  meaning  higher  energy  usage  makes  animations  faster  or  more
frenetic, which might metaphorically represent a “high energy” household state.  Occupancy is given a
weight on Chaos (0.5) and some on Speed (0.4), so more people home introduces more randomness and
also speeds things up (the environment becomes lively and chaotic with people around). 
You can adjust this mapping to fit the metaphors you want: - If you imagine  temperature = warmth in
visuals, perhaps it affects the softness or diffusion of shapes (higher temperature could “melt” shapes or
spread them out). - If humidity = haziness, it might lower contrast or blur things (though blur is tricky in 4-
bit; instead you might represent humidity by adding a grainy dither or fog-like overlay). - If energy use =
activity, it could increase the number of moving elements or the amplitude of fluctuations. - If occupancy =
presence, it might introduce more figurative elements (like more shapes or layers) or simply more motion
when more people are home.
• 
• 
• 
1
• 
• 
3

The key is choosing metaphors that are intuitive. You want a viewer to feel the connection: e.g. “the display
gets  really busy when the house is full of people” or “the pattern  smoothly fades when it’s warm and dry
versus gets  noisy when it’s cold and humid,” etc. Even if they can’t name the data, they should sense a
qualitative change.
To implement the mapping, you can do something like: for each visual parameter P , compute 
P_value = w1 * input1 + w2 * input2 + ... + bias
(where input values are the normalized 0–1 readings, and w1, w2 are weights for how strongly those inputs
affect this parameter). The bias is like a base value for that parameter (when inputs are zero). For example,
you might have a base density of 0.2 (20% filled) even when sensors are all at zero, so the screen is never
completely empty. 
Random  weighting  for  now: Since  you’re  not  sure  about  these  weights  yet,  a  great  approach  is  to
experiment with them dynamically. You could initially assign random weights and see what happens. In
fact, you could even code your system to pick a new random set of weights on each run (or key press) to
explore the design space. This is analogous to exploring different “presets” by chance. You’ll quickly notice
that some weight combinations produce boring or chaotic results while others feel intriguing. Keep notes of
promising combinations or patterns: - Maybe you discover that when occupancy heavily drives density,
the visual becomes cluttered in a compelling way. - Or that  energy use affecting brightness too much
causes unpleasant flicker when energy spikes – a sign to perhaps avoid that direct mapping or to smooth it.
Through this exploration, you can start to manually tune the weights to more sensible values. It can be
useful to have a simple UI slider or config file to adjust weights on the fly if possible. If a UI is too much to
implement now, even printing the current values and allowing adjustments via keyboard input or reading
from a JSON file that you edit between runs could work.
Remember  that  mapping  isn’t  strictly  linear  scaling  either .  You  might  decide  on  special  conditions  or
nonlinear mappings: - e.g. If occupancy = 0 (no one home), you could introduce a distinctly different mode
(perhaps the visual goes into a very quiet, minimal state). This would be like an if-condition in the mapping:
if occupancy_count == 0: set density very low, speed very low, regardless of other 
inputs. - Or thresholds: maybe energy use below a threshold does nothing, but above a high threshold it
kicks a parameter into overdrive to signal a big change.
These are more advanced mapping ideas – you don’t need them initially, but keep them in mind as options
if linear mapping doesn’t capture certain important states.
Throughout the mapping design, keep it understandable. Document in plain language what each input’s
role is: e.g.  “Temperature controls brightness (hotter = brighter) and density (hotter = denser) because heat is
visually represented by intensity and crowding of form.” If you can explain it, you’re more likely to keep the
system logically tuned and avoid arbitrary connections that users (or you) can’t make sense of later .
4

Visual Engine Modules and Parameter Interface
With inputs mapped to visual parameters, now design the Visual Engine that generates the actual imagery.
This should be modular: think of each visual module as a different generative art algorithm or style (for
example, one module might be a particle system, another might be a shifting geometric grid, another a
noise  field,  etc.).  All  modules,  despite  producing  different  visuals,  will  share  a  common  parameter
interface – the set of parameters we defined above (brightness, density, speed, chaos, etc.).
Why a common interface? This ensures you can swap modules in and out without re-writing how data
influences them. Each module will interpret the parameters in its own way, but from the perspective of the
system, switching the module is just like switching the “instrument” while the sheet music (parameters)
stays the same. For example:
Module A (Particles): 
Density = number of particles emitted per frame.
Speed = particle velocity.
Brightness = background brightness or particle trail intensity.
Chaos = randomness in particle motion (0 = particles follow strict paths, 1 = random jitter added).
Module B (Grid of Lines): 
Density = number of grid lines (or cells per row/col).
Speed = how fast the grid pattern oscillates or rotates.
Brightness = thickness of lines or how many of the 16 gray levels are used.
Chaos = probability of a line glitching or offsetting out of place (at 0, a perfect uniform grid; at higher
chaos, some lines are randomly shifted or broken).
Module C (Abstract Landscape or Waves):
Density = frequency of waves or noise detail.
Speed = how fast the waves move or update.
Brightness = overall contrast between wave peaks and troughs.
Chaos = amount of noise distortion in the waveform (0 = smooth sine wave, 1 = fully noisy terrain).
These are just hypothetical mappings, but illustrate how one set of parameters can drive very different
visuals. When implementing, you’ll likely start with one module to get things working. Pick the one you are
most excited about or think will be simplest to realize (maybe a particle system or a grid – something not
too complex, to nail down the pipeline).
Structure  each  module  with  a  clear  update() and  draw() function  (or  equivalent)  if  you’re  using  a
framework.  In  fact,  many  creative  coding  frameworks  enforce  this  separation.  For  example,
openFrameworks (a C++ toolkit popular in generative art) uses an  update() method to handle new
input and an separate draw() to render graphics each frame. Processing (Java/Python) similarly has
draw() which runs in a loop, and you can handle input updates inside it or via events. Emulating this, you
can design your module class as follows:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
2
5

classVisualModule{
virtualvoidupdate(constParams& p) = 0;
virtualvoiddraw()= 0;
}
In update(params), the module reads the current parameter values (e.g., from a struct or global) and
updates  its  internal  state  accordingly.  In  draw(),  it  renders  the  visual  using  that  internal  state.  The
update/draw decoupling is useful: you might update at a slower rate (if inputs come in slowly) but draw at
a higher framerate for smooth animation, interpolating between states. Or , if your data arrives in bursts,
update() can catch up without choppiness in rendering.
Make sure all rendering respects the 4-bit grayscale constraint. Decide early how you’ll enforce 16-level
grayscale: - E.g., if using a graphics API, you might choose a 4-bit palette (0, 17, 34, ..., 255 in RGB values for
16 equally spaced grays) and quantize everything to those. - Or if drawing shapes, use only those 16 gray
values when filling or stroking. - If you generate an off-screen image (say using noise), you can post-process
it with a dithering algorithm (Floyd-Steinberg error diffusion or simple threshold dithering) to reduce to 16
levels. But it might be easier to design the visuals inherently with discrete tones (like Molnár and Mohr often
did with plotters – high contrast, few levels). 
Tip: Use ordered dithering or patterns if you want to suggest intermediate tones smoothly – for example,
a 50% gray can be a checkerboard of black and white on a high-res display, but since you have exactly 16
levels, you might not need dithering unless your display resolution is limited. It might suffice to just use
those 16 levels directly. The reason this is relevant in the Visual Engine stage is that it might affect how you
draw. For instance, instead of drawing a translucent gray shape (which might produce many intermediate
pixel values), you might restrict yourself to solid fills of one of the allowed 16 values. That can lend a certain
aesthetic – almost akin to old video games or e-ink displays – which could be beautiful if done deliberately.
As you build out one module, keep the code modular. In practice, this could mean you have a base class or
simply a consistent function signature. You might have something like:
current_module= ModuleParticles() # for example
# In the main loop:
params= mapping_layer.get_params() # get current Params object/dict
current_module.update(params)
current_module.draw() # draw to screen or buffer
When you want to try a different visual, you instantiate  ModuleGrid() or  ModuleWaves() and set
current_module to that. If they share the same interface, the rest of the loop doesn’t care which one is
running. Eventually, you could even alternate modules or have multiple on screen, but that’s for later –
initially, keep it one at a time to simplify testing.
6

Parameter Weights and Randomization for Testing
As noted, one of your immediate questions is how to choose the mapping weights – and your idea of using
random weighting is a good approach to explore the space. Here’s how you might go about it:
Implement a function randomize_weights() that assigns random values to your weight matrix
(perhaps within some bounds, like 0.0 to 1.0, or you might allow negative weights if you want
inverse correlations, e.g., higher temperature reducing something).
Call this once at startup to get an initial random mapping. You might even print the chosen weights
to the console or overlay them as text on the screen for reference.
Observe the visuals as the simulation runs. Do they change in a way that feels connected to your
(simulated) data? Or does it look random and nonsensical? Because the weights are random, often it
will look arbitrary – but occasionally you might see a flicker of “Oh, when X goes up, Y does this –
that’s interesting.”
Each time you reset or run the program, it will have a new random mapping. Over multiple runs,
start forming an intuition: “I consistently like it better when parameter P is mostly driven by input A
rather than B.”
Consider a more controlled randomization: you could deliberately set one input at a time to have a strong
influence and others minimal, to isolate effects. For example, set all weights to 0 except one, see what a
“pure” influence looks like: 1. Only temperature affects one visual parameter , all others off – does changing
temperature alone produce a noticeable, and perhaps meaningful, change in the output? 2. Then try only
humidity, etc.
This is akin to an A/B test for each input’s visual effect. If an input’s influence is too subtle or too chaotic
when alone, that tells you something (maybe you need to amplify that input or smooth it; or maybe that
input isn’t that visually interesting by itself and should always be combined with another).
After these experiments, start assigning non-random weights based on what you learned. You don’t have
to get it perfect – just better than random. Perhaps you decide: - Temperature should primarily control
brightness (so give it a high weight on Brightness, near 1.0, and low weights elsewhere). - Occupancy
should mainly affect speed and chaos (medium weights on those). - Etc.
Set those as your default mapping and run the system. Now the visuals should react in a more stable,
intentional way. You can fine-tune by watching: Does the output feel too static? Maybe increase a weight to
exaggerate an effect. Is it too nervous or flickery? Maybe decrease a weight or add more smoothing for that
input.
Throughout this tuning, keep a mindset of clarity vs. complexity. You want the influence to be legible but
not so blunt that it’s like a direct graph of the data. A bit of indirection or aesthetic filtering is good. As you
adjust, you might reintroduce a bit of randomness in a controlled way: - Add a global subtle noise factor:
e.g., every frame, slightly jitter some parameters by a tiny random amount. This ensures the visual doesn’t
freeze completely even if data is static. Vera Molnár often spoke about the tension between order and
disorder – a small dose of randomness can make the output feel organic and prevent it from being overly
mechanical. - If an input is relatively steady (say temperature doesn’t change rapidly), you might have its
influence be partly through a noise function rather than a fixed value. For instance, instead of mapping
temperature directly to brightness = 0.7, you could map it to the amplitude of a gently oscillating value. So
• 
• 
• 
• 
1
7

when temp is high, brightness oscillates strongly (like flickering heat haze), when temp is low, brightness
stays more constant. This introduces a temporal texture to the effect.
However , be careful not to overdo randomness to the point that the data’s role is obscured. It’s a balance:
you want viewers to sense the data’s presence, but you don’t want the visualization to become a literal
readout.
Finally, consider using an audio mixing analogy for mapping if that helps: Picture each input as a sound
source and each visual parameter as a speaker . The weights are like faders on a mixing board routing each
sound to each speaker . You, as the designer , are essentially “mixing” the data streams into the visual effects.
During testing, you’ll be playing the role of a DJ or sound engineer , sliding faders up and down (in code or
via random picks) to find a harmonious mix. This conceptual model can make it easier to reason about
weights: too much of one input into one parameter might “drown out” the effect of another , just like too
much bass can drown out the treble in music. Finding a good mix is an iterative, creative process more than
a strict calculation.
Testing and Iteration Strategy
With the system wired up (simulation → input layer (normalize) → mapping → visual engine), it’s time to
test iteratively and refine. Here’s a suggested cycle:
Single-Parameter  Isolation: As  mentioned,  start  by  varying  one  input  at  a  time  while  keeping
others constant. For example, set all inputs mid-range, then take temperature from minimum to
maximum slowly. Observe the changes. Then hold temperature steady, vary humidity through its
range, etc. This checks that each mapping does something noticeable and controllable. If one input
seems to have no visible effect, you may need to increase its weight or adjust the visual parameter
it’s tied to.
Extreme Conditions: Test combinations that simulate extreme real-world scenarios:
All inputs at minimum (perhaps night time, cold, no one home, no energy use) – does the
visualization go appropriately calm or dark?
All inputs at maximum (hot day, many people, lots of energy use) – does it become very intense or
bright? It shouldn’t break or become illegible in 4-bit; if it does, maybe clamp some effects.
Conflicting extremes (one high, another low) – e.g., high occupancy but low energy use, or high
humidity  but  low  temperature.  The  display  should  handle  these  gracefully  and  not  produce
something nonsensical (if it does, maybe your metaphors need tweaking).
Time-Based  Simulation: Run  the  system  over  a  longer  period  with  inputs  changing  in  a  more
realistic temporal pattern. You could script a pseudo-day: e.g., temperature gradually rises then falls
(morning to night), occupancy follows a schedule (people home in evening), energy use spikes at
certain hours. This helps see if the visualization transitions smoothly. Pay attention to  transitions:
does  the  image  evolve  over  time  in  a  pleasing  way?  Avoid  sudden  jumps  (unless  those  jumps
themselves are meaningful, like a sudden event).
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
8

Legibility Checks: Every now and then, stop and ask: If I didn’t know the data, what would I interpret
from this visual? Try to describe it: “right now it looks turbulent and bright” – does that correspond to
what the data simulation is (e.g., lots of activity)? If the answer is consistently off (say the display
looks calm when your simulated data was supposed to be “busy”), you might have a mapping
inversion or need to amplify some link. The goal is an intuitive coupling between data and display,
even if subtle.
Aesthetic Quality: Also evaluate the visuals as art. Since you’re working in grayscale with limited
levels, composition and pattern are key. Do the images look good? This is subjective, but trust your
artistic judgment. If one module’s output never looks interesting, maybe focus on another or tweak
its algorithm. Sometimes you’ll discover a certain parameter combination yields a stunning pattern –
note  what  data  caused  that  and  consider  if  it’s  a  happy  accident  or  something  to  incorporate
deliberately.
During these tests, maintain a notebook or log of observations. It’s easy to forget which version or which
weight produced that great effect last Tuesday. Jot down weight settings or even save them as preset files if
you can (just a text file with the weights used). That way, you can revert to “that cool setting” later . This also
sets the stage for the future UI preset feature – you’re basically doing manually now what a user interface
might allow others to do later .
Iterate on the code and design after each round of testing: - If you notice performance issues on the
Raspberry Pi (low frame rate, etc.), consider simplifying the visual (fewer particles, less frequent updates) or
try the same on the Mac mini to see the difference. Using a more powerful machine in early development is
fine, but always keep Pi’s limits in mind for final deployment. - If something is hard to tune or understand,
consider refactoring. For instance, if you have many weight variables scattered around, it might be easier to
group them into a structure (e.g., a dictionary of weights by input, or by parameter). This makes it easier to
manage and pass around.
Remember to verify the 4-bit output during testing. It’s easy while developing to accidentally be viewing a
full 256-level grayscale image on your monitor . At some point, implement the actual constraint (if your
display is truly 4-bit, this will be inherent; if not, enforce it in software by quantizing). The images might
band or posterize oddly once quantized – make sure that’s an aesthetic you like. You may need to adjust
contrast of your visuals so that they still read well in 16 steps. Using a test image or gradient might help
calibrate this: e.g., ensure a smooth gradient in your system actually renders as 16 distinct bands (so you
know the levels are correctly represented).
Future Integration with Home Assistant Data
Once you’re satisfied with how the logic works with simulated data, you can turn to hooking up the  real
Home Assistant data. This involves a few tasks:
Data Bridge: Set up a connection from HA to your generative system. If HA is running on a separate
device (or even the same Pi), the common methods are:
MQTT: If you have an MQTT broker , HA can publish sensor states to topics. Your generative program
can subscribe to those topics (there are MQTT client libraries for Python and C++). This is real-time
and push-based.
7. 
8. 
• 
• 
9

HTTP API: HA has a REST API. Your program could periodically poll HA for certain values. This is
simpler to implement but less real-time and can introduce slight lag or unnecessary network load if
polled too fast.
WebSocket API: HA also offers a streaming API over WebSockets for real-time updates. This is a bit
more complex than MQTT but doable if you prefer not to run a separate broker .
File or Database: In some setups, you might write sensor data to a file or DB and have the visualizer
read it. This is an option if direct network communication is an issue, but usually MQTT or API is
easier .
Choose whichever fits your environment and skills. MQTT is popular for IoT and has the advantage of
decoupling – HA just publishes data, and your system just listens (fits our one-way philosophy).
Parsing and Normalization (for real data): Likely, you’ll get raw values from HA (e.g., temperature
might come as 22.3 or "22.3" in JSON). Adapt your Input Layer to plug these in. You might need
to  adjust  the  normalization  ranges  if  your  earlier  guesses  were  off.  For  instance,  you  assumed
temperature 18–30°C, but maybe your home actually ranges 15–25 most of the time. It’s okay if the
values rarely hit the 0 or 1 extremes; you just don’t want them clustering only in a tiny middle
portion of 0–1 range. If they do, you can narrow the range for more sensitivity.
Timing: Decide how often to update from HA. Some sensors update every few seconds, some less
often. You could run your update() on a fixed time step (say every 1 second or every new data
event). If using MQTT, you get updates as they happen (which might be irregular). A good approach
is to have the visual engine running at its own frame rate (e.g., 30 or 60 FPS drawing), and the input
layer updating whenever new data is available. When new data arrives, you smoothly blend to the
new parameter values over a short duration instead of snapping, to avoid visual jolts. This can be
done by lerping the parameter values in the update step.
Testing with Real Data: Initially, treat this as another test scenario. You might run the system live
for a day alongside actual home data and record your observations:
Did some values cause unexpected results (e.g., a sensor spike made the screen flash
unintentionally)?
Are there times when nothing changes for long periods (maybe the visuals get boring at night when
everything is stable)? If so, you might introduce a bit more autonomous behavior during those times
(like a screensaver mode when data is static).
Did the visualization ever misrepresent the state (like showing a “busy” pattern when the house was
actually calm)? If so, revisit the mapping; maybe an input you thought indicated activity doesn’t line
up perfectly (for example, perhaps energy use was high because the fridge ran, but nobody’s home –
your system might mistakenly show that as “activity”. You then might dial down how much energy
alone drives the “busy” visuals, or incorporate occupancy to modulate that).
Performance  Check  on  Pi: Ensure  the  Raspberry  Pi  can  handle  the  data  feed  and  rendering
together . If you used a Mac mini to develop, some optimizations might be needed on Pi:
Use hardware-accelerated drawing if possible (OpenGL ES on Pi, etc., which frameworks like
openFrameworks or Processing can leverage).
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
10

If using Python, libraries like Pygame can work but might be slower; you may need to reduce
resolution or effect complexity. Processing on Pi is pretty capable and uses Java which can be okay
with the Pi’s CPU, but openFrameworks tends to get the most performance (reports show
openFrameworks examples hitting 60fps on Pi with full-screen generative graphics). Choose the
tool you’re comfortable with, but be mindful of these trade-offs. Even a Raspberry Pi 4 has limited
GPU/CPU compared to modern PCs, so optimize where you can (e.g., avoid too many alpha-blended
layers or very large textures).
Test at the actual output resolution and on the actual display you plan to use (for instance, if you use
an e-ink screen or a specific monitor). Different displays might have different update constraints (e-
ink is slow to refresh, etc.).
Modularity for Future Expansion: As you integrate real data, keep the system architecture modular .
It should be straightforward to add a new sensor: update the Input Layer (normalize it) and then
possibly use it in the mapping. Likewise, adding a new visual module should not require rewriting
the whole data pipeline – just create the new module following the same interface. If you find
yourself duplicating a lot of code to accommodate something new, pause and refactor . The upfront
investment in a clean modular design will pay off when you expand the project.
User  Adjustments  (Future): You  mentioned  not  worrying  about  user-tunable  parameters  yet
(sliders, UI). But as you finalize the logic, consider how a user would adjust it if they could. This often
influences how you code things. For example, if you envision a “weight adjustment UI”, maybe keep
the weights in a config struct that could be reloaded or tweaked without recompiling. You could even
expose a simple text file for now where a curious user (or you in the future) can edit weight values
and the program reads them on start. This way, even without a fancy interface, you have a path for
adjustability. It aligns with the idea of presets – e.g., a config for “Calm mode” vs. “Chaotic mode”
could just be two weight files.
Finally,  maintain  alignment  with  the  conceptual  vision:  the  system  is  a  non-intrusive  observer  that
translates environmental data into art. As you integrate the real data, step back and evaluate: Does it still feel
like a mirror of the home? If something feels off conceptually (for instance, if a certain data stream actually is
not that meaningful or interesting to visualize), you have the freedom to downplay or even remove it. It’s
better to use a few data sources well than to force every available metric into the visualization. Generative
art thrives on elegance and intentionality – it’s often the restraints (like your chosen 4-bit grayscale medium,
or a select set of inputs) that lead to the most coherent and striking outcomes.
Tools and Frameworks Considerations
While the logic design is tool-agnostic, a few notes on frameworks given your hardware targets:
Processing (or  p5.js):  These  are  excellent  for  quick  prototyping.  Processing  has  a  version  for
Raspberry Pi and should support all its normal drawing functions on the Pi. It’s very accessible if
you want to test visuals rapidly, and it has built-in easy handling of drawing and some UI. You could
prototype your modules in Processing (Java or Python Mode) on your Mac, then try them on the Pi.
Performance might be moderate; if you keep things simple it could be sufficient. The benefit is the
huge community and documentation, which might speed up coding and debugging.
• 
3 4
4
• 
• 
• 
• 
3
11

openFrameworks (C++):  As  mentioned,  openFrameworks  was  co-created  by  artists  like  Zach
Lieberman specifically for creative coding, and it runs on Raspberry Pi well. It’s less beginner-
friendly  than  Processing  (you  need  to  manage  a  bit  more  C++  boilerplate)  but  it  offers  high
performance – many openFrameworks examples run at 60fps on a Pi even with complex graphics
. Since you eventually want multiple modules and perhaps more complex visuals, the efficiency
could help. If you go this route, structure your classes around OF’s setup/update/draw pattern,
which naturally fits our layered design (read data in update, draw with current params). Note that
openFrameworks can also easily integrate with add-ons (like ofxOSC or ofxMQTT) for receiving data,
if needed.
Python with libraries: If you prefer Python, you can use Pygame or Pyglet for drawing, or even a
minimalist approach with PIL/Pillow to manipulate pixel data and blit to the screen. Python is slower ,
but since your output is relatively simple (grayscale graphics), it might be fine if you’re careful. You
could  also  use  a  Python  binding  for  OpenGL  (like  PyOpenGL)  or  a  creative  coding  lib  like
Processing.py or Py5. Python has the advantage of quick development and easy integration with
network data (lots of MQTT and HTTP client libraries). The downside is performance on Pi – but you
could test on the Pi early to gauge it.
Web-based (Canvas/WebGL): Another option is to run a local lightweight web server on the Pi and
do visuals in a browser (using p5.js or three.js or custom WebGL shaders). This can leverage the Pi’s
GPU via WebGL and you can use JavaScript. It might be overkill, but one advantage is you could use a
web interface both for visuals and controls (sliders on a webpage controlling weights, for instance).
However , if you’re not already into web coding, this might complicate the project unnecessarily.
Given  you  have  a  Mac  mini  M4  as  a  fallback,  one  approach  is:  develop  in  the  most  convenient
environment on the Mac (could be Processing or openFrameworks on macOS, etc.), then optimize/port to
Pi.  Keep  your  code  organized  so  that  hardware-specific  bits  (like  data  fetching  or  drawing  calls)  are
abstracted or easily replaced for the Pi.
For example, you might write a version in Python now because it’s quick to test ideas. Later , if Python proves
too  slow  on  Pi,  you  can  port  the  critical  parts  (like  the  visual  modules)  to  C++  openFrameworks.  The
conceptual architecture (inputs → params → visuals) will remain the same across languages.
Conclusion & Next Steps
You now have a plan to build the system in layers: simulate inputs, map to visual parameters, and create
modular visuals that respond to those parameters. By using randomness and iteration, you’ll hone in on a
design where external data meaningfully influences the grayscale generative art. Remember to keep notes,
adjust one thing at a time, and gradually build up complexity. The historical inspiration you gathered – from
Molnár’s subtle rule variations to Reas’s clarity of coded structure – will serve as a guiding philosophy:
simple  rules,  carefully  applied,  can  yield  rich  behavior. And  with  each  test  and  tweak,  you’re  essentially
conducting a dialogue between the data and the visuals, finding an expressive balance between order and
chaos (to quote Lieberman on Molnár’s work, the beauty is in the space between order and chaos).
Moving forward, as you gain confidence in the system’s logic, you can start formalizing parts of it: - Define a
set of default weight presets that feel “right” for your home’s typical patterns. - Write documentation for
• 
5
4
• 
• 
1
12

each module about how it interprets each parameter (this will help if others use it, or if you return to the
project later). - Eventually, consider implementing that simple UI for switching modules or tweaking weights
live – perhaps using key presses or a basic web dashboard – to make the system more interactive for the
end user (even if that user is just you and your family).
But  those  are  future  enhancements.  For  now,  focus  on  nailing  the  core  logic  and  seeing  beautiful
grayscale  patterns  emerge  in  response  to  data.  With  a  methodical  approach  and  creative
experimentation, you’ll create a system that is not only technically robust but also a piece of generative art
that lives in your home, continuously painting a picture of the hidden data patterns of everyday life.
Sources:
Jack DiLaura, Generative Graphics Tools for Raspberry Pi – notes on Processing vs. openFrameworks for
performance . 
Raspberry Pi Forum – openFrameworks as a popular C++ creative coding toolkit in art/design. 
Baukunst interview with Zach Lieberman – on the influence of Vera Molnár’s balance of randomness
and order in generative art. 
Krisjanis Rijnieks, Generative Graphics with openFrameworks on the Raspberry Pi – emphasizing
separate update() for data and draw() for visuals. 
Generative Art with Zach Lieberman
https://baukunst.co/stories/collabs/generative-art-with-zach-lieberman
Generative Graphics with openFrameworks on the Raspberry Pi
http://kr15h.github.io/generative-graphics-with-of-on-rpi/
Generative Graphics Tools for Raspberry Pi - The Interactive & Immersive HQ
https://interactiveimmersive.io/blog/interactive-media/generative-graphics-tools-for-raspberry-pi/
openFrameworks on Raspberry Pi is here! - Raspberry Pi Forums
https://forums.raspberrypi.com/viewtopic.php?t=23086
• 
4 3
• 6
• 
1
• 
2
1 5
2
3 4
6
13