Technical Plan: Data‑Driven Generative Visualizer
(4‑Bit Grayscale)
System Overview & Goals
This project will be implemented as a modular software system that generates real-time visuals in 16-level
grayscale. The system will be  data-driven (influenced by external sensor or Home Assistant data) but
designed such that the core logic and aesthetic rules are clear and adjustable by the user . In the initial
phase, we’ll use  simulated inputs (random or scripted data feeds) to develop and test the logic. This
ensures we understand how the algorithms work before hooking up real Home Assistant data.
Key  Objectives  Recap: The  system  should  produce  compelling  grayscale  visuals  with  limited  tonal
resolution, be tunable by non-experts, and reflect external data in a legible yet artistic way. We will maintain
a one-way flow of influence: data → visuals (no feedback from visuals back to sensors).
Architecture Design
To  manage  complexity,  the  software  will  be  organized  into  three  main  layers,  each  with  a  distinct
responsibility. This layered design echoes approaches used by generative art pioneers, who emphasized
clear rules and systems in their work :
Input Layer: Handles incoming data (sensor readings, HA states, etc.) and provides a current data
snapshot to  the  rest  of  the  system.  In  early  development,  this  layer  will  output  simulated  or
randomized data streams instead of real sensor data (e.g. using random number generators or sine
wave  functions  to  mimic  changing  values).  This  allows  us  to  prototype  the  visual  logic  without
needing a live sensor hookup. The input layer will eventually be replaced or augmented by a Home
Assistant data adapter (e.g. an MQTT or REST client) once the visualization logic is solid.
Mapping Layer: Transforms raw input values into normalized parameters and high-level semantic
channels. This is where we interpret sensor data in ways that affect the visuals. The mapping layer
will combine and scale inputs into meaningful variables – for example: 
activity_level could be a blend of motion sensor counts and room occupancy data. 
energy_intensity might derive from home energy usage (Watts) normalized to a 0–1 range. 
climate_variability could combine temperature and humidity readings (or their rate of
change). 
Each of these channels ranges over a fixed interval (say 0.0 to 1.0) and has a defined influence on the visual
output. By separating this layer , we make it easy to adjust how data maps to visuals without changing the
drawing code. Weighting configurations live here: e.g. “density = 0.7 * energy + 0.3 * humidity” as a formula.
During prototyping, these weights can be  chosen arbitrarily or even randomized to experiment with
different influences (as you suggested, we might start with random weights each run to see a variety of
1 2
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
1

behaviors). Over time, we’ll tune them to achieve mappings that are both legible and aesthetically pleasing.
The goal is to avoid straightforward graph-like representations and instead find  subtle or metaphorical
mappings. For instance, rather than directly drawing a bar for temperature, a high temperature might
gradually increase the turbulence in a particle system – a less literal, more artistic reflection of “heat.”
Visual Engine Layer: This layer is responsible for the generative graphics output. It consists of one
or more visual modules (algorithms) that read the parameters from the mapping layer and produce
drawings/animations accordingly. Each module encapsulates a particular aesthetic style or
technique (for example, a grid of shifting shapes, a field of particles, a flowing noise texture, etc.).
The modules share a common interface so they can be swapped in and out:
Each module will implement an update(params) function that takes the current parameter set
(from the mapping layer) and uses it to update the module’s state (e.g. move points, add shapes,
change speeds).
Each module also implements a draw(canvas) (or simply draws to the screen) function that
renders the current state to the display in 4-bit grayscale. 
By enforcing a minimal interface (much like a modular synthesizer where each module has input knobs and
an output signal), we ensure new visual algorithms can be added without modifying the rest of the system.
This draws inspiration from systems like Casey Reas’s  Process series, where the  rules (analogous to our
module code) are separate from the specific images they produce. Here, our “rules” are the code in each
module that dictates how visuals evolve in response to input parameters.
Output Format & Grayscale Constraint: All drawing will be constrained to 16 discrete grayscale levels (0–
15). To achieve this: - We will quantize any continuous tone output into 16 steps. If using a graphics library
that  outputs  8-bit  grayscale  (0–255),  we  map  those  values  to  the  nearest  4-bit  level  (e.g.,  value  =
floor(pixel_value / 16)). - To create the illusion of smoother gradients or richer texture within those 16
shades,  we  can  employ  dithering  techniques.  For  instance,  an  ordered  dithering  matrix or  Floyd-
Steinberg error diffusion could be applied when rendering images with gradients. Dithering will disperse
quantization error in a pattern, tricking the eye into seeing intermediate tones by the arrangement of dark
and light pixels. This is optional for certain styles – in some cases a stark 16-tone image (like a posterized
look) might be aesthetically desired. We’ll decide per module whether to use dithering or not, to balance
clarity versus visual richness. - We will leverage contrast, shape, and motion heavily, since we cannot rely
on color . Techniques from early computer art and printmaking (strong silhouettes, hatching or stippling for
mid-tones, moiré patterns, etc.) can be useful. For example,  Vera Molnár achieved remarkable variation
using just lines and simple shapes with slight rule-bending. We can similarly introduce small procedural
randomness (Molnár’s famous “1% disorder”) into our drawing routines to avoid overly rigid output and
give it a humanized, lively feel.
Ensuring One-Way Data Flow
Architecturally, the system will not send any data or commands back to the Home Assistant/sensor side.
The  Input  Layer  client  will  be  strictly  read-only.  This  guarantees  our  visuals  do  not  influence  the
environment, they only reflect it. This one-way design simplifies the logic (no feedback loops to manage)
and aligns with the concept of the system as an  ambient mirror of the home’s state. In code, this just
means we never call any HA service or write to any actuator – only subscribe/read. It keeps the relationship
conceptually  clear  and  avoids  any  unintended  side-effects  in  the  home  when  experimenting  with  the
visuals.
• 
• 
• 
1
3
3
2

Development Plan & Phases
We will implement the project in incremental phases, validating the logic at each step:
Phase 1 – Prototype Visuals with Simulated Data (on PC/Mac): We begin on a powerful machine (your
Mac mini) for convenience and speed. In this phase, we’ll write several simple generative drawing sketches
without  real  data.  Instead,  we’ll  create  dummy  data  streams:  e.g.,  a  slowly  oscillating  value  to  mimic
temperature, a random spike generator to mimic motion events, etc. The goal here is to exercise the
Mapping and Visual layers in isolation. We’ll develop a rudimentary data simulator module that produces
a  JSON  or  dictionary  of  key→value  pairs  (one  for  each  data  channel,  like  temperature: 0.65,  
occupancy: 0.2, etc.), updating them over time. This simulator can have modes (random, periodic, or
even playback of recorded data if available).
During this phase, we also establish the software framework and libraries: - Decide on the programming
environment. Two strong options are: -  Python (with libraries like Pygame or PyOpenGL for rendering)
which is quick to develop and has good library support, or -  C++ with openFrameworks for potentially
better performance and graphics capabilities on the Pi. - Given the Raspberry Pi target, using OpenGL
ES or SDL via C++ might yield smoother performance for graphics-heavy sketches. openFrameworks (C++
toolkit) is attractive here because it’s built for creative coding and has cross-platform support (Linux/ARM
for Pi, and macOS). Many generative artists (like Zach Lieberman) use openFrameworks to get efficient
real-time graphics on limited hardware. On the other hand, Python might be easier to integrate with
Home Assistant’s Pythonic ecosystem. We might start with Python for simplicity and only move to C++/
openFrameworks if performance tests in Phase 3 demand it. - We create the skeleton code for modules. For
example,  if  using  Python,  we  can  define  an  abstract  base  class  VisualModule with  methods
update(params) and  draw(surface).  Then  each  specific  visual  effect  will  subclass  this.  If  using
openFrameworks/C++, we might define a base class or simply adhere to a pattern (since C++ doesn’t have a
built-in interface concept like Java, but we can use abstract classes or function pointers). - Implement one
simple visual module first – for instance, a grid of rectangles whose sizes shift based on a parameter . This
will  test  end-to-end  flow:  simulator  → mapping  → one  visual  output.  We’ll  verify  that  adjusting  the
simulated  input  indeed  changes  the  graphics  as  expected  (ensuring  our  parameter  mapping  is  doing
something perceptible).
Phase 2 – Data Pipeline Integration: With a working prototype of the visual system, we’ll integrate real
data from the external source: - Set up a connection to  Home Assistant. This could be through HA’s
WebSocket API or MQTT if HA is configured to publish sensor states. Another option is periodic REST calls
to HA’s API to fetch sensor values. MQTT is great for near-real-time streaming of sensor updates with low
overhead. - Implement the  Input Layer client that subscribes to relevant data topics (e.g., temperature,
humidity, motion, power usage topics). It will receive updates and maintain a global state dictionary of the
latest values for each channel. - Feed this real data into the Mapping layer . We’ll need to normalize and
clamp values. For example, if temperature comes in as 72°F, the mapping layer might subtract a baseline
and divide by a range to yield a 0–1 value. Where possible, use moving averages or smoothing filters on
raw data to prevent overly erratic visuals (unless that’s desired for something like instantaneous motion
spikes). - At this stage, the visual modules should start responding to actual home events. We might run the
system on the Mac (still) but pulling data from the Pi or HA over the network, just to test the whole loop in a
comfortable dev environment.
4
4
4
3

We will likely discover that some data channels are noisy or not very dynamic, which could lead to visuals
that are either jittery or too static. We should refine the mapping functions here: - Possibly introduce
thresholds or nonlinear mapping. E.g., use a logarithmic scale for power usage so that moderate changes
are visible but a huge spike doesn’t completely overwhelm the parameter . - Ensure each data stream has a
meaningful effect on the image. We don’t want a parameter that never changes or one that changes so
fast it just looks random. Tuning and observing in this phase is crucial.
Phase 3 – Port to Raspberry Pi & Optimization: Now we transfer the system to the Raspberry Pi hardware
(our target small device). Key tasks and considerations: - Deploy environment: Install necessary libraries on
the Pi. If using Python, that means Pygame/PyOpenGL, Numpy, etc. If using openFrameworks C++, we will
compile our code for ARM (openFrameworks has build configs for Raspberry Pi). We need to test that the
Pi’s  GPU  (if  any,  e.g.  using  OpenGL  ES)  or  CPU  can  handle  our  rendering  at  a  decent  frame  rate.  -
Performance tuning: Likely we’ll need to adjust parameters for the Pi. This could include: - Lowering the
output  resolution or update  frame rate if needed. For example, rendering at 720p instead of 1080p to
lighten the load, or updating visuals 20 times per second instead of 60 if full frame rate isn’t achievable,
given that some generative art looks fine at lower fps or can interpolate. - Simplifying visuals that are too
computationally  heavy.  If  a  module  uses  hundreds  of  objects  and  the  Pi  struggles,  we  might  cap  the
number of elements or find more efficient drawing methods (like using PyOpenGL to draw many points via
a single shader , or in openFrameworks using VBOs). - Utilizing the Pi’s strengths: If on a Pi 4 with the
VideoCore  GPU,  we  might  leverage  hardware-accelerated  paths.  OpenFrameworks  automatically  uses
hardware acceleration for drawing shapes, but in Python we might consider using OpenGL shaders for
expensive effects. - Testing on target display: If the final installation uses a specific display (say a small e-
ink screen or just an HDMI monitor in grayscale mode), test the grayscale output. Ensure that our 16 shades
are distinguishable on that display. Some displays might have gamma issues – e.g., the darkest few grays
might all look black. We may need to tweak the mapping to the 0–15 range (maybe use a gamma curve or
adjust specific levels). - Confirm that the one-way data feed works on the Pi. The Pi might itself run Home
Assistant or be networked to the main HA server . In either case, ensure our Input Layer client on the Pi is
receiving data timely. We’ll run the visualizer for extended periods to see stability (memory leaks, network
hiccups,  etc.).  Using  a  Raspberry  Pi  also  invites  the  possibility  of  attaching  direct  sensors (like  a  Pi
temperature sensor GPIO) in the future, but for now, HA data is the assumed source.
Phase 4 – User Controls & Modularity Enhancements: Once the core system is running smoothly on the
Pi, we’ll improve the  adjustability and user interface: - Implement a simple  configuration file or  web-
based UI that exposes the main adjustable parameters. For instance, a JSON or YAML config could list the
current weightings and module settings. A small web server on the Pi (possibly a lightweight Flask app or
even just an HTTP endpoint if using openFrameworks with ofxAddon for web UI) could present sliders and
buttons. This UI doesn’t have to be fancy; even controlling via SSH or a text file that the program reads is
okay in early stages. The important part is that a non-programmer user can tweak things like “weight of
temperature on visual blur” or switch from Module A to Module B. - Introduce the concept of presets or
scenes: a saved set of parameter mappings and chosen module. The user can load a preset to quickly
change the overall behavior (e.g. a “Calm mode” preset vs. an “Energetic mode”). We might implement this
as multiple config files or a menu in the UI. - Expand the library of visual modules. We started with one or
two in earlier phases; now we can add more. Thanks to our modular architecture, this is easier – each new
module  just  needs  to  conform  to  the  update/draw interface  and  can  reuse  the  existing  data  feed.
Examples of modules we can attempt: - A  Particle System: many small circles or dots that wander . Data
mappings: “activity_level” controls the number of particles and their speed; “energy_intensity” could control
the direction bias or size of particles (e.g., high energy = particles trace longer streaks or move more
4

erratically). - A Grid of Lights: think of a grid of 2D cells (like an 16×16 matrix) that light up or change shade.
Data could influence patterns like Conway’s Game of Life step rate, or simply the noise that turns cells on/
off. For instance, “occupancy” might increase the density of lit cells, whereas “climate_variability” (temp/
humidity  changes)  might  introduce  flicker  or  turbulence  in  the  pattern.  -  Waveform  or  Line-based
Drawing: e.g., a set of horizontal lines that undulate like an abstract horizon. Data mapping: one channel
could modulate the amplitude of waves, another the frequency of the wiggles, another the overall slope or
drift of the lines. This could create a visual metaphor of “calm vs chaotic” environment – calm data yields
gently  waving  lines,  busy  data  yields  jagged  oscillations.  -  Typographic/ASCII  Art  Forms:  Since  4-bit
grayscale evokes old terminals or e-ink, one module could use characters or blocks that fill the screen,
whose darkness corresponds to a data channel. For example, if you have a set of 16 ASCII characters from
light to dark (like  .:-=+*#%@ etc.), the program could fill the screen with a character whose index is
proportional to, say, current energy use (higher energy → heavier character). This is a more playful, less
abstract module.
Each new module we add will test the generality of our system. We might refine the parameter set or add
new  ones  if  a  visual  style  needs  something  specific  (for  example,  a  “color  temperature”  parameter  is
irrelevant in grayscale, but a “pattern randomness” parameter might be needed for a certain algorithm). We
should strive to keep the parameter set consistent across modules for the user’s sake – e.g., always use
activity_level to mean something akin to motion or busyness, even if module A uses it for particle
count and module B uses it for line turbulence. Consistency will make it easier for a user to predict what
increasing a slider will do in different visuals.
User Testing and Iteration: At this stage, if possible, involve a few test users (or ourselves taking on
a user perspective after a break) to see if the controls and outputs are understandable. Does the
user roughly grasp “ah, this looks more intense when more people are home” or “this pattern calms
down when it’s quiet at night”? If not, we might need to adjust mappings or add on-screen indicators
(perhaps subtle text overlays or LED indicators in a physical installation) to guide interpretation.
However , we should avoid anything too literally informational – the display is ambient art, not a
dashboard.
Throughout all phases, maintain documentation: we’ll keep notes on what each parameter does, how each
module works, and any decisions (like why we scaled X this way or chose Y algorithm). This will help in
writing the final report/reflection.
Mapping Strategies & Algorithm Design
Designing the mapping from data to visuals is the crux of making the system legible yet intriguing. Here
we outline how we’ll craft the logic and some example algorithms:
Data Normalization: All sensor inputs will be normalized to a common scale. We’ll define for each
data type a plausible min–max range (either based on real physical limits or historical data). For
example, temperature might map 60°F to 0.0 and 80°F to 1.0 (if the home is always between those),
whereas something like “number of people detected” might map 0 people to 0.0 and 5 people to 1.0
(assuming 5 is a full house). Values outside the expected range can be clipped or could be mapped in
a nonlinear way if needed (to avoid saturation effects).
• 
• 
5

Weight Combinations vs. Direct Mappings: In some cases, one sensor directly drives one visual
parameter (e.g., time of day from HA could directly set a background brightness – darker at night).
In other cases, a mix of inputs is more interesting. We will use  weighted sums or functions to
combine  inputs  into  “meta-parameters.”  For  instance,  an  “activity_level” parameter  might  be
computed as:
activity_level  =  0.5  *  normalized(motion_sensor_count)  +  0.5  *  
normalized(noise_level)
If such data exists. Early on, if we aren’t sure, we can indeed assign random weights or try extremes
(all weight on one input) to subjectively judge what produces the most engaging result. Over time,
we’ll refine these by observing the output when feeding in recorded real data. The mapping logic will
likely live in a function that reads the raw data dict and outputs a params dict. This function can be
made easily configurable (perhaps reading a config file of weights, or code constants at first).
Temporal Smoothing & Change Detection: A critical part of the algorithm is how to handle time. If
data changes too rapidly, the visual may flicker or become noise. If it’s too slow, the visual might be
boring. We can incorporate logic like:
Running averages or low-pass filters on inputs for smoother changes.
Alternatively, detect trends or sudden changes and map those to distinct visual responses. E.g., if
energy usage jumps quickly (maybe someone turned on an appliance), that change could trigger a
one-time burst in the visuals (like a flash or a momentary pattern) separate from the continuous
state. This adds another layer of dynamism: not just reflecting the steady-state values but also the
first derivatives (deltas). We can incorporate simple state memory in the mapping layer to compare
current vs previous values.
Time-of-day  or  cyclical  behaviors:  Perhaps  introduce  subtle  shifts  over  the  day  even  if  data  is
constant, to keep visuals from freezing when environment is steady. For example, a slow oscillation
could be applied to a parameter so that even if all sensors are static, the visual still breathes a little
(preventing burn-in on displays and adding a sense of life).
Examples of Data-to-Visual Mappings (Logic): To ground this, consider a specific  Visual Module
and walk through how data influences it:
Example Module: “Flow Field”: Imagine a field of short line segments that resemble a flow or wind
pattern. They could be drawn across the screen, each oriented in some direction. How might data
drive this? We could say:
The wind direction displayed is driven by an average of outside wind direction (if available
from weather API) or simply a fixed noise pattern (if no direct analog).
The turbulence or variability in the flow is tied to, say, the number of people at home or
recent motion. When more activity is detected, the flow lines get more chaotic or jittery. This
could be done by increasing a noise field’s amplitude or the randomness of each line’s angle.
The speed of movement of these lines (if they slowly drift) could correlate with energy usage
– high power usage speeds everything up (as if the system is “humming” with electricity).
Now, implementing this: in update(params), we might have 
for each line: angle = base_flow(x,y) + randomness * activity_level; 
length = base_length; drift_speed = 0.5 + energy_intensity * 1.0, etc. So
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
6

the code clearly ties activity_level to the amount of random perturbation, and 
energy_intensity to how fast lines move.
In draw(), we render each line with a grayscale determined maybe by another parameter
(e.g., perhaps temperature controls brightness: hotter = brighter lines). This way, multiple
data points layer into one image in different facets (motion affects shape, energy affects
motion, temperature affects brightness).
Because this could get confusing, we’d document these mappings in the code and perhaps in
the user guide, so it’s clear (“In Flow Field module: occupancy influences turbulence, energy
influences flow speed, temperature sets base gray level” etc.).
Example Module: “City Lights”: Think of a stylized city skyline or bar graph that grows and shrinks. This
could be represented by a row of vertical bars (or building silhouettes). Data mapping:
Each bar could correspond to a different sensor (e.g., different rooms’ motion or different
appliance power usage). Then the height of the bar is the current value. This is a more literal
mapping, almost infographic, but we could make it abstract by not labeling them and making
the bars semi-random widths.
Alternatively, treat the whole set of bars as one shape and use a single parameter to control
an overall pattern – for example, “activity_level” could control the jaggedness or roughness of
the skyline top (higher activity makes the skyline flicker with tiny highs and lows, low activity
makes it a smooth gentle curve).
The grayscale mapping could be inverted here: maybe one parameter (like time of day or a
recent change) causes the “lights” to turn on/off (white vs black bars). For example, at night
perhaps the background goes dark and bars are lighter (like lit windows), whereas in day the
background is light and bars dark. This introduces an environmental context (time) as a data
input too (from HA’s clock or sun state).
The logic for this module might be simpler math – directly mapping values to heights and
colors. It’s important we still apply aesthetic considerations (ease the transitions, maybe
quantize heights to some grid so they don’t look like raw analog bars, etc., to keep an artistic
feel).
Algorithm Inspiration from Art History: We can take cues from the references:
Manfred Mohr’s fixed geometric structures: Mohr built works by systematically iterating through
combinations of a base form (like edges of a cube). We can mirror this by picking a geometric
motif (say a cube wireframe, a grid, a spiral) and then use data to pick which portions to draw or how
to transform it. For instance, imagine a wireframe cube where sensor data decides the rotation angle
or which edges are highlighted. The logic would involve predefining the cube’s coordinates and then
using data values to rotate it or fade certain edges in/out. While this might be more static than
others, it could serve as a calm, structured visualization – and it resonates with the idea of exploring
combinations under constraints.
Vera Molnár’s subtle randomness: As noted, we can incorporate tiny randomness to avoid
perfectly repetitive output. Algorithmically, this means any time we have a repetitive structure
(like a grid of identical shapes), we add a small random offset that’s constant for a while (to not
flicker per frame, we can choose a random offset per shape on initialization). This makes the output
look less machine-perfect and more organic, improving its expressive quality without losing the
underlying pattern.
◦ 
◦ 
• 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
• 
• 
2
2
• 
3
7

Casey Reas’s process of emergent complexity from simple rules: We might design one module to
be an agent-based simulation (like boids or cellular automata), which inherently can produce
complex emergent visuals. The logic is: define simple behaviors for elements and let them interact.
We can let data influence parameters of those behaviors (e.g., a Conway’s Life where the birth/death
rules or probabilities are skewed by a sensor). The result won’t directly encode the data in a graph,
but the character of the evolving pattern will shift. This echoes Reas’s idea of software as generative
rule systems rather than static compositions. We will need to carefully observe if such systems
still reflect the data changes in a noticeable way or if they drown in their own complexity. If the latter ,
we scale back complexity for clarity.
Tools, Libraries, and Hardware Considerations
Graphics Library: As mentioned, we will choose between Python and openFrameworks C++. For
concreteness, suppose we start with Python to quickly prototype (using Pygame for a window and
drawing shapes, or possibly Processing’s Python mode for convenience if preferred). Python allows
fast tweaking, and there are image libraries (PIL/Pillow) if we need to do pixel-by-pixel operations
(like custom dithering). If performance lags, we can optimize hotspots (e.g., using NumPy to
vectorize computations, or writing a C extension for heavy math).
Raspberry Pi specifics: We’ll likely use a Raspberry Pi 4 (since it was mentioned as a target). The Pi 4
can run an X server or framebuffer for graphics. If performance is an issue, we might render at a
smaller off-screen surface and then scale it up. Since the output is just grayscale, even dropping to a
lower resolution and relying on the display’s own scaling might not look bad (could even add to a
pixel-art aesthetic). Also, ensure the Pi has GPU drivers set up for OpenGL ES if using hardware accel.
Home Assistant integration: If Home Assistant is running on the Pi itself, we might have direct
access to sensor data via local files or databases. More commonly, we’ll connect over the network.
We should handle potential disconnects gracefully – e.g., if HA goes down or Wi-Fi drops, the
visualizer should not crash. We can implement reconnection logic or at least hold the last values and
perhaps slowly fade to an idle pattern if data is stale for too long (like if no new data for , say, 5
minutes, maybe the visuals enter a standby or loop on a default calm animation).
Persistence: The system’s adjustable settings (weights, chosen module, etc.) will be saved in a config
(possibly JSON) so that if the Pi reboots or the program restarts, it can recall the last setup. This is
straightforward to implement by writing the config whenever changes are made in the UI or by
loading it on start.
Testing & Iteration speed: We will maintain the ability to run the program on a PC where possible
to leverage debugging and faster dev cycle. We could simulate the Pi environment or use a subset of
data. openFrameworks code can be compiled and run on Mac/Windows as well, which is handy. If
using Python, we just need to ensure any Pi-specific libraries are abstracted or not required on PC
(for example, if using a library to read GPIO on Pi, on PC we’d stub that out).
Evaluation Plans (Post-Implementation)
(This is more forward-looking, but it’s important to define how we’ll know the system is successful and identify
areas to refine.)
• 
1
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
8

Once the system is up and running with actual home data, we will evaluate it along several dimensions
relevant to our design goals:
Data Legibility: Watch the real-time output and note if changes in the home are observable in the
visuals. For instance, does the morning routine (lights turning on, coffee maker power spike, people
waking up) correspond to a noticeable shift in the display’s behavior? If a viewer knows the general
metaphor (e.g., “this wavy pattern = activity levels”), they should at least detect relative changes (“it’s
more chaotic now than before, probably something happened”). We might even do a simple test:
deliberately trigger a change (turn on a device, simulate occupancy) and see if the visual responds in
the expected manner .
Aesthetic Engagement: Gather feedback on the look and feel. With the 4-bit grayscale constraint,
does the output still appear rich and interesting? We’ll pay attention to whether the lack of color
feels like a strength (cohesive, classic look) or a limitation (e.g., some data influence might be clearer
if color was used). If the latter , we might need to compensate by adjusting brightness or contrast
mappings. We will also check the effect of dithering – is it improving the perceived quality or is it
distracting? Fine-tuning the dithering pattern (matrix size, error diffusion strength) might be needed
per module.
Modularity & Extensibility: Try adding a totally new visual module late in the project and see how
smoothly it integrates. If it requires a lot of special-case code, our architecture might need
refactoring. Ideally, a new module should be pluggable by just registering it in a list of modules and
hooking up its parameters. This is analogous to how audio software plugins work and is a good test
of modular design.
User Tuning Experience: If we have a UI for controls, let a friend or colleague use it without much
guidance. See if the labels and ranges make sense. For example, if a slider is labeled
“Energy→Density weight”, does adjusting it have a noticeable and understandable effect on the
visuals? If not, maybe the control scheme needs simplification (perhaps group multiple low-level
weights into one “mood” slider , etc.). We want users to feel they can explore the system creatively,
not get lost in technical minutiae.
Performance & Stability: Finally, ensure the Raspberry Pi can run the system continuously (e.g.,
24/7 if intended as an ambient display). Monitor CPU/GPU usage and temperature. If the Pi is near
its limits, we might underclock visuals when idle (e.g. at night if nobody is around, maybe
automatically reduce frame rate to let the Pi rest, unless the night pattern is itself essential). We
should also confirm that memory usage doesn’t grow (no memory leaks in our loops).
By iterating on these evaluation points, we will refine both the  logic (mapping algorithms, parameter
choices) and the presentation (visual algorithms, interface) of the system.
Conclusion
This  technical  plan  lays  out  how  to  proceed  from  concept  to  a  working  prototype  of  the  grayscale
generative art system. By  starting with simulated data and a clear architecture, we ensure that we
understand the logic of how data influences art before dealing with real-world complexities. The approach
is informed by the practices of generative art pioneers – using well-defined rules and embracing constraints
to spur creativity (as seen in Mohr’s algorithmic approach and Molnár’s balance of order/chaos). We
also take inspiration from creative coding frameworks like Processing and openFrameworks that champion
accessibility and modularity in art-making software. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
2 3
1 4
9

By the end of implementation, we expect to have a versatile system where swapping data inputs or visual
styles is straightforward. The logic will be transparent enough that tuning the behavior doesn’t require
diving  into  code  –  fulfilling  the  goal  of  being  understandable  and  adjustable  by  non-experts.  And  most
importantly,  the  final  visuals  should  provide  an  ambient  but  meaningful  reflection  of  the  home
environment: a piece of “living art” that quietly mirrors life’s rhythms in 4-bit grayscale glory. 
Process — REAS.com
https://reas.com/process
Cubic Limit by Manfred Mohr - bitforms gallery
https://www.bitforms.art/artwork/cubic-limit-3
Generative Art with Zach Lieberman
https://baukunst.co/stories/collabs/generative-art-with-zach-lieberman
1
2
3 4
10